---
layout: distill
title: Approximating KL Divergence (and its applications in RL)
description: Can we do a better KL approximation
tags: math
categories: math
giscus_comments: true
date: 2025-11-04
featured: true

authors:
  - name: Rohit Vartak
    # url: "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albert_Einstein"
    affiliations:
      name: Duke University

bibliography: 2018-12-22-distill.bib

# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
  - name: The what?
  - name: The why?
  - name: Equations
    # if a section has subsections, you can add them as follows:
    # subsections:
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 1
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 2
  - name: Citations
  - name: Footnotes
  - name: Code Blocks
  - name: Interactive Plots
  - name: Layouts
  - name: Other Typography?

# Below is an example of injecting additional post-specific styles.
# If you use this post as a template, delete this _styles block.
_styles: >
  .fake-img {
    background: #bbb;
    border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    box-shadow: 0 0px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    margin-bottom: 12px;
  }
  .fake-img p {
    font-family: monospace;
    color: white;
    text-align: left;
    margin: 12px 0;
    text-align: center;
    font-size: 16px;
  }

---

## The What?

This post discusses Monte Carlo approximations of the KL divergence, motivated by ideas from (cite) and (cite). While these works introduce the essential concepts, I found that several mathematical steps were either implicit or not fully formalized. Here, I aim to present a clearer and more rigorous derivation.

The KL divergence between distributions $q$ and $p$ is defined as:

\begin{equation}
\label{eq:kl}
\mathrm{KL}(q \,\|\, p) := \sum_x q(x)\, \log \left(\frac{q(x)}{p(x)}\right)
\end{equation}

Note that we can view the above as the mean of random variable $\log (r)$ where $r:= \frac{q(x)}{p(x)}$ with $x\sim q$. So,
\begin{equation}
\label{eq:kl-exp}
\mathrm{KL}(q \,\|\, p) := \mathbb{E}_{x \sim q} \left[ \log (r) \right]
\end{equation}

Additionally, we can also sample $x \sim p$ with the above being rewritten as,
\begin{equation}
\label{eq:kl-exp-p}
\mathrm{KL}(q \,\|\, p) := \mathbb{E}_{x \sim p} \left[ r \log (r) \right]
\end{equation}

In many machine learning settings, including reinforcement learning for language models, we have access to the log-probabilities produced by the models, but the summation over the full support of $x$ is intractable, as I will explain in the next section.

## The Why?

In RL-based LLM training (such as GRPO), we maintain two policy models: the *reference* policy $\pi_{\text{ref}}(\theta)$ and the *old* or *previous* policy $\pi_{\text{old}}(\theta)$. The RL objective includes the KL term

$$
\mathrm{KL}\big(\pi_{\text{ref}}(x \vert s) \,\|\, \pi_{\text{old}}(x \vert s)\big),
$$

where $s$ is the current state of the LM (this could be a prompt or context) and $x$ is the generated next token or token sequence. $x$, here, is sampled from a distribution over the token space. In other words, if the tokenizer has $V$ vocabulary entries, to compute the KL divergence we need to sum over $V$ entires and this quickly becomes intractable since $V$ is large. To complicate things further, in RL, we typically do multi-step rollout which means our space becomes exponential in $V$.


(add something about the multi step probabilities stuff)

## The naive first estimator for KL Divergence ($k_1$)

If we cannot compute the expected value over the entire distribution space, we do the next best thing. Sample $N$ obvervations and compute the mean of that (Monte Carlo simulation).

So the process looks like this:

1. Sample $x_1, x_2, \cdots x_N \sim q$

2. Compute the $\log (r_i)$ for each sample

3. Estimate $\hat{KL} = \frac{1}{N} \sum_i \log (r_i)$

Notice that this is an unbiased estimator since each $x_i \sim q$, the mean matches that form in Eq. (\ref{eq:kl-exp}).

However, it is high variance...


## The second slightly better estimator for KLD ($k_2$)

